From cadsi.com!kent@elvis.cadsi.com Thu Nov 17 14:12:46 1994
Date: Thu, 17 Nov 1994 13:38:31 -0600
From: Kent Williams <cadsi.com!kent@elvis.cadsi.com>
Reply to: cadsi.com!kent@cadsi.com
To: electronica+@andrew.cmu.edu, casio@cadsi.com
Subject: Casio (was Re: analog)

On Nov 17, 12:06pm, Ab Wilson wrote:
> The only Casio synth I'm really  familar with is  the CZ101. Since all
> the CZ series  have the same archetecture I  feel I can  generalise my
> views to all of these.

I've got a collection of nearly 200  patches for the CZ, so there's a lot
of different sounds you can make.  It is one of those synthesizers where you
can spend a lot of time specifying how  each note will sound, but for which
there is very little you can globally vary about a performance -- no
free-running LFO's.  The real strength of the old analogs was that different
modules could be set up to sync with other modules, or simply to modify other
modules asynchronously.  That's why I want a midi-fied serge modular.

The CZ-1 has a velocity sensitive keyboard with aftertouch, which can interact
very nicely with the CZ architecture; you can individually set velocity
sensitivity for the pitch envelope, amp envelope and waveform envelope.
My favorite trick is to make pitch and amp relatively insensitive and make
waveform very sensitive, meaning that different key pressure gives you a
different waveform.

>
> One thing I've always  wanted to know about Casio  synths was what the
> big different was  between the PM synthesis as  used in the CZ  series
> and the iPM as used in the VZs. Can anyone give an authoritive answer?
>
The CZ has a digital architecture that goes kind of like this

DCO1->DCW1->DCA1-+
                 |
                 +---> Mix/Ring Mod/Noise
                 |
DCO2->DCW2->DCA2-+

There are 6 different waveforms possible, and the DCW envelop varies between a
sine wave (DCW level 0) and the 'full' waveform (DCW level 99).  Morphing the
waveform from a sawtooth to a sine for example, sounds a lot like closing a
steep non-resonant filter.

The Noise modulation is really just mixing a noise source on line 2 with the
tone source on line one.

The VZ series works something like FM (perhaps equivalent on some level to FM,
without infringing on Yamaha patents, if you get my drift).  You have 8
oscillators in pairs of two.  Each oscillator can be a sine, one of 4 types of
sawtooth, or two types of noise.  Each pair can be internally mixed, ring
modulated, or 'phase' modulated.  The four pairs are set up such that they
either get mixed to the final output or phase modulate another pair.

There are no filters!

What is phase modulation (or phase 'distortion')?  I've not figured out
exactly.  Something like this:  If source A phase distorts source B, the
momentary value of A controls distortion of B's slope.  At amplitude 0, B is
unmodifed; at maximum amplitude B's slope is changed drastically.

The net effect is that if you phase distort a signal with high amplitude
signal, it gets pretty dirty and fuzzy.  If you set all the lines to sine, set
all modulation paths to phase mod, and set the amplifier envelopes to be full
on when a note is played, you get a really evil noise like a guitar fed through
multiple distortion boxes.

The really weird part comes when you fool around with velocity sensitivity;
For each step in the amplifier envelope for a line you can enable or disable
velocity sensitivity.  This makes it very easy to come up with heavily
distorted unpredictable sounds.  It's also very hard to get an idea for a sound
in your head and then implement it.

The presets seem to be very sparing in their use of phase distortion.  They're
also not very interesting.  I would dearly love to get a decent editor for this
thing and give it a good workout.

Does that answer your question?


-- 
Kent Williams -- kent@gilligan.cadsi.com
Look in the mail header for all sorts of  vital information about me.
Go on, EMOTE!  I was RAISED on thought balloons!!

